SPECIAL ARTICLE

ESMO Clinical Practice Guideline for the diagnosis, staging and treatment of
patients with metastatic breast cancer5

A. Gennari1, F. André2, C. H. Barrios3, J. Cortés4,5,6,7, E. de Azambuja8, A. DeMichele9, R. Dent10, D. Fenlon11, J. Gligorov12,
S. A. Hurvitz13,14, S.-A. Im15, D. Krug16, W. G. Kunz17, S. Loi18, F. Penault-Llorca19, J. Ricke2,17, M. Robson20, H. S. Rugo21,
C. Saura22, P. Schmid23, C. F. Singer24, T. Spanic25, S. M. Tolaney26, N. C. Turner27, G. Curigliano28, S. Loibl29,
S. Paluch-Shimon30 & N. Harbeck31, on behalf of the ESMO Guidelines Committee*

1Department of Translational Medicine, University of Piemonte Orientale, Novara, Italy; 2Breast Cancer Unit, Medical Oncology Department, Gustave RoussydCancer
Campus, Villejuif, France; 3Oncology Research Center, Grupo Oncoclínicas, Porto Alegre, Brazil; 4International Breast Cancer Center (IBCC), Quironsalud Group,
Barcelona; 5Scientiﬁc Department, Medica Scientia Innovation Research, Valencia; 6Vall d’Hebron Institute of Oncology (VHIO), Barcelona; 7Universidad Europea de
Madrid, Faculty of Biomedical and Health Sciences, Department of Medicine, Madrid, Spain; 8Medical Oncology Department, Institute Jules Bordet and l’Université
Libre de Bruxelles (U.L.B.), Brussels, Belgium; 9Hematology/Oncology Department, Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA; 10Department of
Medical Oncology, National Cancer Centre Singapore, Singapore; 11College of Human and Health Sciences, Swansea UniversitydSingleton Park Campus, Swansea, UK;
12Département d’ Oncologie Médicale, Institut Universitaire de Cancérologie AP-HP, Sorbonne Université, Hôpital Tenon, Paris, France; 13Department of Medicine/
Division of Hematology Oncology, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles; 14Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, Los Angeles, USA;
15Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital, Cancer Research Institute, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of
Korea; 16Department of Radiation Oncology, University Hospital Schleswig-HolsteindCampus Kiel, Kiely; 17Department of Radiology, University Hospital, LMU Munich,
Munich, Germany; 18Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, Melbourne, Australia; 19Centre de Lutte Contre le Cancer Jean Perrin, Imagerie Moléculaire et Stratégies
Théranostiques, Université Clermont Auvergne, UMR INSERM-UCA, Clermont Ferrand, France; 20Medicine Department, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New
York; 21Department of Medicine, University of California San Francisco Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, San Francisco, USA; 22Breast Cancer Program,
Vall d’Hebron University Hospital, Vall d’Hebron Institute of Oncology (VHIO), Barcelona, Spain; 23Centre of Experimental Cancer Medicine, Cancer Research UK Barts
Centre, Barts and The London School of Medicine and Dentistry, London, UK; 24Center for Breast Health and Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, Medical
University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria; 25Europa Donna Slovenia, Slovenia; 26Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, USA; 27The Royal Marsden Hospital NHS Foundation
Trust, London, UK; 28Early Drug Development for Innovative Therapies Division, Istituto Europeo di Oncologia, IRCCS and University of Milano, Milan, Italy; 29GBG
Forschungs GmbH, Neu-Isenburg, Germany; 30Sharett Institute of Oncology Department, Hadassah University Hospital & Faculty of Medicine Hebrew University,
Jerusalem, Israel; 31Breast Center, Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology and Comprehensive Cancer Center Munich, LMU University Hospital, Munich, Germany

Key words: diagnosis, ESCAT, ESMO Clinical Practice Guideline, ESMO-MCBS, metastatic breast cancer, treatment

GENERAL PRINCIPLES

Metastatic breast cancer (MBC) is an incurable disease, but
survival improvements have been reported with appro-
priate therapeutic strategies.1-8 Systemic therapy is the
standard-of-care in MBC but may be supplemented with
locoregional treatments (LRTs) according to the disease
status of the individual patient. Thus, a multidisciplinary
team (MDT) is a prerequisite for optimal management.
These guidelines are based on breast cancer (BC) biological
subtypes even though modern targeted drugs may lead to
revisions of these subtypes in the future, as exempliﬁed by
the ﬁrst tumour-agnostic approvals.
Treatment decisions need to be made independent of
patient age, but comorbidities and patient characteristics,

as well as patient preferences, need to be considered as
part of a shared decision-making process. In elderly pa-
tients, a comprehensive geriatric assessment may add
important information.9

Supportive care should always be part of the treatment
plan and early introduction of expert palliative care may
help to better control symptoms.
Rechallenge with drugs previously used in the early
breast cancer (EBC) setting is a reasonable option, provided
that the disease-free interval (DFI) is 12 months after the
last drug administration and that no remaining toxicities
exist. Approved biosimilars can be used instead of originator
drugs in all registered indications.10

This
patient
population
should
be
encouraged
to
consider participation in clinical trials early in their disease
course, with preference given to enrolment on to a clinical
trial, if available, in each line of therapy.

INCIDENCE AND EPIDEMIOLOGY

BC is the most frequent cancer affecting women. Although

DIAGNOSIS, PATHOLOGY AND MOLECULAR BIOLOGY

A proposed algorithm for the diagnostic work-up of MBC is
shown in Figure 1. Patients with newly diagnosed or
recurrent MBC should have a biopsy, if technically feasible,
to conﬁrm histology and to re-assess estrogen receptor
(ER), progesterone receptor (PgR) and human epidermal
growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) status [I, B]. Biopsies of
bone metastases should be avoided, whenever possible,
due to technical limitations of biomarker detection in
decalciﬁed tissue. If there are important differences in ER/
PgR and HER2 status between the primary tumour and
recurrence, it is unknown which biological features should
drive the treatment decision making. The decision should
take into account the biological features of the disease at
baseline, the degree of biomarker heterogeneity, the type
of treatment received that could potentially induce a se-
lection of clones resistant to a speciﬁc targeted therapy and
the burden of the disease. The use of ET or anti-HER2
therapy should be considered when ER/PgR or HER2 are
positive in at least one biopsy, regardless of timing. The use

of chemotherapy (ChT), with or without immune checkpoint
inhibitor (ICI) therapy according to programmed death-
ligand 1 (PD-L1) status, or targeted therapies such as anti-
body-drug conjugates (ADCs) should be considered for pa-
tients
with
metastatic
triple-negative
breast
cancer
(mTNBC). A similar approach should be reserved for pa-
tients with discordance in HER2 status when negative at
baseline and positive in the metastatic setting; if HER2-
positive in the metastatic setting, anti-HER2 therapy should
be considered. In all scenarios, the multidisciplinary tumour
board should discuss treatment options on a case by case
basis.16 This tumour heterogeneity needs to be taken into
account for each new line of treatment and a re-biopsy may
be appropriate in cases of mixed response.
In ER-low tumours (i.e. ER positive in 1%-9% tumour
cells), limited evidence suggests that these cancers may be
less sensitive to endocrine therapy (ET), although they may
beneﬁt from treatment with ET and cyclin-dependent ki-
nase 4 and 6 (CDK4/6) inhibitor combinations [IV, B].17

Recommendations

 At ﬁrst diagnosis of MBC, a biopsy should be carried out
to conﬁrm histology and re-assess tumour biology (ER,
PgR, HER2) [I, B].
 Other therapeutically relevant biomarkers to be assessed
as part of routine clinical practice include: germline
BRCA1/2 mutation (gBRCAm) status in HER2-negative
MBC, PD-L1 status in triple-negative breast cancer
(TNBC)
and
phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate
3-kinase catalytic subunit alpha (PIK3CA) in ER/PgR-
positive, HER2-negative MBC [I, A; ESMO Scale for Clinical
Actionability of Molecular Targets (ESCAT) score: I-A].
 Genomic proﬁling and further diagnostic tests [e.g. on
tumour tissue or circulating tumour DNA (ctDNA)]
should only be carried out as part of routine clinical prac-
tice if the result will change the treatment approach, as
guided by the ESCAT scale, or if the patient can access
appropriate clinical trials [V, B].

STAGING AND RISK ASSESSMENT

Recommendations

 The minimum imaging work-up for staging includes
computed tomography (CT) of the chest and abdomen
and bone scintigraphy [II, A].
 [18F]2-ﬂuoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose (18F-FDG) positron emis-
sion tomography (PET)eCT may be used instead of CT
and bone scans [II, B].18,19

 There is no evidence that any staging or monitoring
approach provides an OS beneﬁt over another.19

 The imaging modality chosen at baseline should be
applied for disease monitoring to ensure comparability
[III, B].

Patients with newly diagnosed or recurrent MBC

Biopsy of metastatic lesion to 
conﬁ
 rm diagnosis

Reassess biomarkers ER, PgR, HER2 
[ESCAT I-A]a,b

All patients
Patients with 
ER+/HER2– tumours
Patients with TNBC 
tumours

PD-L1 by IHC [ESCAT I-A]b

gBRCAm [ESCAT I-A] (PALB2
assessment optional [ESCAT II-A])b

Assessments only where corresponding therapies are available: MSI [ESCAT I-C], TMB, NTRK [ESCAT I-C]b

Optional assessments with potential to guide treatment: ESR1 (in ER+/HER2– tumours if further AI-based therapy is considered) 
[ESCAT II-A]b, somatic BRCA mutations [ESCAT II-A]b, HER2-low status by IHC [ESCAT II-B]b

Staging: history and physical examination, haematology, biochemistry, tumour markers, CT of the chest and abdomen 
and bone scintigraphy (or PET-CT), brain imaging (symptomatic patients or according to subtype if the presence of CNS 
metastases will alter the choice of therapy)

Figure 1. Diagnostic work-up and staging of MBC.
Purple: general categories or stratiﬁcation; white: other aspects of management.
AI, aromatase inhibitor; CNS, central nervous system; CT, computed tomography; ER, estrogen receptor; ESCAT, ESMO Scale for Clinical Actionability of Molecular
Targets; ESR1, estrogen receptor 1; gBRCAm, germline BRCA1/2 mutation; HER2, human epidermal growth factor receptor 2; IHC, immunohistochemistry; MBC,
metastatic breast cancer; MSI, microsatellite instability; NTRK, neurotrophic tyrosine receptor kinase; PALB2, partner and localiser of BRCA2; PD-L1, programmed death-
ligand 1; PET, positron emission tomography; PgR, progesterone receptor; PIK3CA, phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate 3-kinase catalytic subunit alpha; TMB, tumour
mutation burden; TNBC, triple-negative breast cancer.
a If there are important differences in ER/PgR and HER2 status between the primary tumour and recurrence, patients should be managed according to receptor status of
the recurrent disease biopsy.
b ESCAT scores apply to genomic alterations only. These scores have been deﬁned by the guideline authors and validated by the ESMO Translational Research and
Precision Medicine Working Group.89

 The interval between imaging and treatment start should
be 4 weeks.
 Evaluation of response should generally occur every 2-4
months depending on disease dynamics, location, extent
of metastasis and type of treatment [V, B].18

 Disease monitoring intervals should not be shortened as
there is no evidence of an OS beneﬁt but potential for
emotional and ﬁnancial harm [IV, D].20 Less frequent
monitoring
is
acceptable,
particularly
for
indolent
disease.
 If progression is suspected, additional tests should be
carried out in a timely manner irrespective of planned
intervals [V, B].18

PIK3CA mutation status [ESCAT I-A]b

gBRCAm [ESCAT I-A] (PALB2
assessment optional [ESCAT II-A])b

 Repeat bone scans are a mainstay of evaluation for
bone-only/predominant metastases, but image interpre-
tation may be confounded by a possible ﬂare during the
ﬁrst few months of treatment [III, C].19

 PETeCT might provide earlier guidance in monitoring
bone-only/predominant metastases, but prospective tri-
als are needed to study the impact on treatment deci-
sions and OS [III, C].19,21

 Impending fracture risk should be evaluated by CT or
X-rays. The spine instability neoplastic score provides
reproducible risk assessment for vertebral metastases.22

In case of suspected cord compression, magnetic reso-
nance imaging (MRI) is the modality of choice [I, A].

 Symptomatic patients should always undergo brain im-
aging, preferably with MRI [II, B].

MANAGEMENT OF ADVANCED AND METASTATIC DISEASE

Luminal breast cancer

A proposed treatment algorithm for the management of
hormone receptor (HR)-positive, HER2-negative MBC is
shown in Figure 2.
Premenopausal
women
may
be
treated
as
post-
menopausal provided that they have ovarian function
suppression (OFS) or ovarian ablation. Bilateral oophorec-
tomy provides more rapid estrogen suppression than
gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonists, the latter of
which can cause a tumour ﬂare in the ﬁrst 2 weeks of
treatment due to a short-term increase in hormone levels.
Bilateral
oophorectomy
maybe
preferable
if
a
rapid
response is required.
Primary endocrine resistance is considered for patients
who relapse during the ﬁrst 2 years of adjuvant ET or pro-
gression of disease (PD) within the ﬁrst 6 months of ﬁrst-
line ET for MBC. Secondary
(acquired) resistance is
deﬁned as relapse during adjuvant ET but after the ﬁrst 2
years, relapse within 12 months of completing adjuvant ET
or PD 6 months after initiating ET for MBC.24

First-line treatment. CDK4/6 inhibitors combined with ET
are the standard-of-care for ER-positive, HER2-negative
MBC, with improved progression-free survival (PFS) and
OS and a good toxicity proﬁle seen in several trials [I, A;
ESMO-Magnitude of Clinical Beneﬁt Scale (ESMO-MCBS)
v1.1 scores: 3-5].25-31 ET plus CDK4/6 inhibition yields
similar or better efﬁcacy versus ChT32,33 and is associated
with less toxicity, making it the preferred treatment unless a
patient has imminent organ failure. Although there is little
data on use of CDK4/6 inhibitors after progression on CDK4/
6 inhibitors, rechallenge may be possible after a treatment-
free interval of 12 months based on evidence regarding
rechallenge with other therapies.
CDK4/6 inhibitors are effective in de novo or recurrent
MBC, in cases of primary or secondary endocrine resistance,
in postmenopausal or premenopausal women [the latter
with a luteinising hormone-releasing hormone (LH-RH)
agonist] and in men (with an LH-RH agonist). For patients
who did not relapse on an aromatase inhibitor (AI), or
within 12 months of stopping adjuvant AI, a CDK4/6

inhibitor in combination with an AI is advised, with no clear
advantage of fulvestrant seen in a phase II study.34 In pa-
tients who relapsed on adjuvant AI therapy, or within 12
months of stopping adjuvant AI, a CDK4/6 inhibitor in
combination with fulvestrant is advised [ESMO-MCBS v1.1
score: 4]. While there have been no head-to-head com-
parisons of the three approved CDK4/6 inhibitors, the efﬁ-
cacy of the three drugs in the metastatic setting appears
similar. Palbociclib and ribociclib have not demonstrated
single-agent efﬁcacy and must be combined with ET; how-
ever, abemaciclib has demonstrated limited single-agent
efﬁcacy [ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 3].35 Direct cross-trial
comparisons are not possible due to the heterogeneous
inclusion criteria. The toxicity proﬁles of these three drugs
are slightly different,25-30 and patients who develop severe
toxicity characteristic of one CDK4/6 inhibitor may switch to
a different CDK4/6 inhibitor.
ET alone in the ﬁrst-line setting should be reserved for
the small group of patients with comorbidities or a per-
formance status (PS) that prevents the use of CDK4/6 in-
hibitor combinations; there are no clinical or biomarker
data that can help to identify patients suitable for ET alone.
Older age alone should not be used to select for endocrine
monotherapy, although there may be a higher incidence of
haematological adverse events (AEs) from CDK4/6 inhibitor
therapy in older patients.1

In patients who required ﬁrst-line ChT due to imminent
organ failure, or who did not have access to a CDK4/6 in-
hibitor in the ﬁrst-line setting, it is clinically acceptable to
use ET plus a CDK4/6 inhibitor as a subsequent therapy in
cases of progressive disease. In general, maintenance ET
(single agent) following ChT may be an option in clinically
stable patients based on the physician’s judgement.

Second-line treatment

Options after progression on a CDK4/6 inhibitor. In pa-
tients who relapse after ET plus a CDK4/6 inhibitor, deter-
mination of somatic PIK3CA and estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1)
mutations (optional, if further AI is being considered), as
well as germline BRCA1/2 and partner and localiser of
BRCA2 (PALB2) mutations (optional), is recommended.
The optimal sequence of endocrine-based therapy is
uncertain after progression on CDK4/6 inhibitors. It is
dependent on which agents were used previously [in the
(neo)adjuvant or advanced settings], duration of response
(DoR) to previous ET (for use of second-line single-agent
ET), disease burden, patient preference and treatment
availability. Evidence-based available options for second-
line therapy include fulvestrantealpelisib (for PIK3CA-
mutated tumours) [I, B; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 2; ESCAT
score: I-A], exemestaneeeverolimus [I, B; ESMO-MCBS v1.1
score: 2], tamoxifeneeverolimus [II, B; off label], fulves-
tranteeverolimus [II, B; off label], AI, tamoxifen, fulvestrant,
ChT or poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitors for
tumours harbouring gBRCAm [I, B; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score:
4; ESCAT score: I-A].

PD
Somatic mutation testing
(tissue or liquid)
Germline BRCA1/2 testing + PALB2

No risk of organ failure

Everolimus–exemestanea

Fulvestranta

[I, B]
or
Everolimus–fulvestanta,b

If PIK3CAm+:
fulvestrant–alpelisib 
[I, B; MCBS 2; ESCAT I-A]c,d

(+ CDK4/6 inhibitor if not 
used previously)

[II, B]

PD after several lines of ET ± targeted therapies

ChT

Figure 2. Treatment of ER-positive/HER2-negative MBC.
Purple: general categories or stratiﬁcation; turquoise: combination of treatments or other systemic treatments; white: other aspects of management; blue: systemic
anticancer therapy.
AI, aromatase inhibitor; CDK4/6, cyclin-dependent kinase 4 and 6; ChT, chemotherapy; EMA, European Medicines Agency; ER, estrogen receptor; ESCAT, ESMO Scale for
Clinical Actionability of Molecular Targets; ESR1, estrogen receptor 1; ET, endocrine therapy; FDA, Food and Drug Administration; HER2, human epidermal growth factor
receptor 2; m, mutation; MBC, metastatic breast cancer; MCBS, ESMO-Magnitude of Clinical Beneﬁt Scale; OFS, ovarian function suppression; PALB2, partner and
localiser of BRCA2; PARP, poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase; PD, progressive disease; PIK3CA, phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate 3-kinase catalytic subunit alpha.
a OFS if the patient is premenopausal.
b Preferred if the patient is ESR1 mutation positive [ESCAT score: II-A].d

c ESMO-MCBS v1.193 was used to calculate scores for new therapies/indications approved by the EMA or FDA. The scores have been calculated by the ESMO-MCBS
Working Group and validated by the ESMO Guidelines Committee (https://www.esmo.org/guidelines/esmo-mcbs/scale-evaluation-forms-v1.0-v1.1/scale-evaluation-
forms-v1.1).
d ESCAT scores apply to genomic alterations only. These scores have been deﬁned by the guideline authors and validated by the ESMO Translational Research and
Precision Medicine Working Group.89

e If relapse <12 months after end of adjuvant AI: fulvestranteCDK4/6 inhibitora; if relapse >12 months after end of adjuvant AI: AIeCDK4/6 inhibitora.

The SOLAR-1 phase III randomised, placebo-controlled
trial evaluated the role of alpelisib, an oral inhibitor of the
phosphoinositide 3-kinase-alpha (PI3Ka) isoform, in combi-
nation with fulvestrant, for postmenopausal women and
men who had been previously treated with an AI. In the
PIK3CA-mutant cohort, alpelisib provided a PFS beneﬁt of
11.0 versus 5.7 months [hazard ratio (HR) for progression or
death
0.65;
95%
conﬁdence
interval
(CI)
0.50-0.85;
P < 0.001]36; the median OS was 39.3 months for alpelisibe
fulvestrant and 31.4 months for placeboefulvestrant (HR
0.86; P ¼ 0.15).37 Toxicity was increased substantially in the
alpelisib arm, especially hyperglycaemia, rash, gastrointes-
tinal (GI) toxicity (nausea, vomiting, loss of appetite, muco-
sitis, diarrhoea) and fatigue, which led to dose reductions/
interruptions in w70% and discontinuations in 25% of

Patients with ER+/HER2– MBC

If imminent organ failure

ChT

ET–CDK4/6 inhibitor [I, A]a,e

At PD

Imminent organ failure

If germline BRCA/PALB2m+:
PARP inhibitor 
[I, A; MCBS 4; ESCAT I-A]c,d

CDK4/6 inhibitor plus ET. Although only 7% (n ¼ 20) of
SOLAR-1 patients had been previously exposed to a CDK4/6
inhibitor, the phase II trial, BYLieve, has shown efﬁcacy of
alpelisib with ET (AI or fulvestrant) after CDK4/6 inhibitor
use.38

In the phase III BOLERO-2 trial, everolimuseexemestane
signiﬁcantly
improved
median
PFS
versus
placeboe
exemestane (7.8 versus 3.2 months, HR 0.45) in patients
who had progressed on a nonsteroidal AI,39 but there was
no signiﬁcant OS or quality-of-life (QoL) beneﬁt.40 None of
the patients enrolled in this trial had previously received
CDK4/6 inhibitors, although retrospective analyses suggest
that prior exposure to CDK4/6 inhibitor therapy may not
impact survival outcomes for patients receiving ever-
olimuseexemestane.41,42 In patients with tumours har-
bouring an ESR1 mutation, substituting the exemestane
backbone with fulvestrant is favoured [ESCAT score: II-A; off
label].43 If everolimus is used, appropriate prophylaxis, such
as dexamethasone oral solution, should be prescribed to
prevent the incidence and severity of stomatitis.44

In the BOLERO-6 trial comparing exemestaneeever-
olimus with everolimus or capecitabine monotherapy,45

everolimuseexemestane conferred a PFS beneﬁt over
everolimus alone (HR 0.74; 90% CI 0.57-0.97), thereby
supporting
its
continued
use
in
an
endocrine-based
sequence [I, B; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 2]. However, this
isolated PFS beneﬁt may have been exaggerated by a high
level of informative censoring.46 For patients unlikely to
tolerate exemestaneeeverolimus, capecitabine is a good
option since the PFS and OS for these agents are not
signiﬁcantly different.45

Third-line
treatment
and
beyond.
Considerations
for
treatment in the third-line setting and beyond should take
into account sensitivity to previous treatments received,
time to progression, gBRCAm status, tumour biology
(including other germline and somatic alterations, if results
are available) and mechanisms of resistance that may have
arisen during previous treatments (a tumour biopsy or
ctDNA analysis could be carried out, if feasible).
For patients deemed endocrine sensitive, continuation of
ET with agents not previously used in the metastatic setting
may represent an option to delay time to ChT and achieve
some clinical beneﬁt [III, B].
For patients considered endocrine resistant where tar-
geted agents have already been used or ruled out due to
lack of therapeutically relevant molecular alterations, ChT
should be considered [V, B].
If ChT is indicated, single agents are generally preferred
over combination strategies based on QoL considerations,
except for patients who need a rapid response due to dis-
ease burden, since a superior OS beneﬁt for combination
strategies has not been demonstrated and they are gener-
ally more toxic [II, A]. In gBRCAm carriers, PARP inhibitors
are associated with an improved PFS and QoL, but not OS,
compared with single-agent ChT [I, A; ESMO-MCBS v1.1
score: 4; ESCAT score: I-A].47,48

The optimal ChT sequence in MBC has not been estab-
lished. Taxanes and anthracyclines should be considered,
especially in patients who have not received these agents in
an earlier setting or in patients with a DFI of 12 months
after use of these therapies [II, B]. If available, use of
liposomal anthracyclines or protein-bound paclitaxel may
be considered for the rechallenge [II, B]. If rechallenge with
anthracyclines is planned, attention needs to be paid to the
lifetime cumulative dose limits and cardiac monitoring is
mandatory.49 Capecitabine, eribulin, vinorelbine, platinums
or other agents should be discussed with patients as po-
tential treatment options [I, A]; the reported efﬁcacy in
terms of PFS and OS, expected toxicity proﬁle, administra-
tion route and treatment schedule all need to be explained.
If capecitabine is used, patients should undergo germline
variant testing for the lack of enzyme, dihydropyrimidine
dehydrogenase (DPD), before treatment is initiated.50 The
combination of a taxane or capecitabine with bevacizumab,
if available, is a ﬁrst-line ChT option, given the reported PFS
beneﬁt versus ChT alone and lower toxicity compared with
combination ChT, even in the absence of an OS beneﬁt or
improvement in QoL [I, C; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 2].51

ChT should
generally
be
continued
until
disease
progression or intolerable toxicity (except for anthracy-
clines where the maximum cumulative dose should
be taken into consideration to minimise cardiac toxicity)
[II, B].8

Recommendations

First-line treatment

 A CDK4/6 inhibitor combined with ET is the standard-of-
care ﬁrst-line therapy for patients with ER-positive,
HER2-negative MBC, since it is associated with substan-
tial PFS and OS beneﬁts and maintained or improved
QoL [I, A; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 scores: 3-5].
 ET alone in the ﬁrst-line setting should be reserved
for the small group of patients with comorbidities or a
PS
that
precludes
the
use
of
CDK4/6
inhibitor
combinations.
 Pre- and perimenopausal women must receive OFS in
addition to all endocrine-based therapies.

Second-line treatment

 Selection of second-line therapy (ChT versus further
endocrine-based therapy) should be based on disease
aggressiveness, extent and organ function, and consider
the associated toxicity proﬁle.
 Alpelisibefulvestrant is a treatment option for patients
with PIK3CA-mutant tumours (in exons 7, 9 or 20), prior
exposure to an AI ( CDK4/6 inhibitors) and appropriate
HbA1c levels [I, B; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 2; ESCAT
score: I-A].
 Everolimuseexemestane is an option since it signiﬁcantly
prolongs PFS [I, B; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 2]. Tamoxifen
or fulvestrant can also be combined with everolimus [II,
B]. If everolimus is used, stomatitis prophylaxis must be
used.

 PARP inhibitor monotherapy (olaparib or talazoparib)
should be considered for patients with germline patho-
genic BRCA1/2 mutations [I, A; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score:
4; ESCAT score: I-A] and as an option for those with so-
matic pathogenic or likely pathogenic BRCA1/2 or germ-
line PALB2 mutations.
 At least two lines of endocrine-based therapy are
preferred before moving to ChT.
 In patients with imminent organ failure, ChT is a
preferred option.

Beyond second line

 For patients with endocrine-sensitive tumours, continua-
tion of ET with agents not previously received in the met-
astatic setting may represent an option [III, B].
 Patients with tumours that are endocrine resistant
should be considered for ChT [V, B].
 Sequential single-agent ChT is generally preferred over
combination strategies. In patients where a rapid
response is needed due to imminent organ failure, com-
bination ChT is preferred [II, A].
 Available drugs for single-agent ChT include anthracy-
clines, taxanes, capecitabine, eribulin, vinorelbine, plati-
nums and other agents.
 Rechallenge with anthracyclines or taxanes is feasible in
patients with a DFI 12 months. If available, the use of
liposomal anthracyclines or protein-bound paclitaxel may
be considered for the rechallenge [II, B].
 The combination of a taxane or capecitabine with beva-
cizumab, if available, is an option for the ﬁrst line of ChT
[I, C; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 2].
 If capecitabine is used, patients should undergo germline
variant testing for the lack of enzyme, DPD, before start-
ing treatment.
 ChT should generally be continued until PD or intolerable
toxicity (except for anthracyclines where the cumulative
limit needs to be taken into account) [II, B].
 The optimal sequence of therapy in MBC has not been
established. Available options should be discussed with
the patient [I, A].

HER2-positive breast cancer

First-line treatment. A proposed treatment strategy for
the ﬁrst- and second-line treatment of HER2-positive
MBC is shown in Figure 3. The CLEOPATRA trial estab-
lished the gold standard in the ﬁrst-line setting: adding
pertuzumab to docetaxel and trastuzumab increased
median PFS by >6 months (18.5 versus 12.4 months with
and without pertuzumab, respectively, HR 0.62; 95% CI
0.51-0.75 months; P < 0.001) [I, A; ESMO-MCBS v1.1
score: 4; ESCAT score: I-A].52 At a median follow-up of >8
years, there was a 16.3-month improvement in median
OS (HR 0.69; 95% CI 0.58-0.82 months) associated with
the addition of pertuzumab to trastuzumabedocetaxel.3

Docetaxel should be given for at least six cycles, if
tolerated, followed by maintenance trastuzumabepertu-
zumab until progression [I, A]. An alternative taxane may
substitute docetaxel [II, A].

Trastuzumabepertuzumabetaxane is recommended in
the ﬁrst-line setting regardless of HR status (ER and/or PgR)
[I, A]. However, ET may be added to trastuzumabepertu-
zumab maintenance therapy after completing at least six
cycles of upfront concomitant ChT for those with HER2-
positive, HR-positive tumours [II, A].53

If patient comorbidities, personal preferences or PS
preclude the use of ChT in patients with HER2-positive,
HR-positive BC, ET (e.g. an AI) in combination with a HER2-
targeted therapy, such as trastuzumab,54,55 trastuzumabe
pertuzumab,53 trastuzumabelapatinib56 or lapatinib,57 may
be used [II, B]. The use of single-agent ET without a HER2-
targeted therapy is not routinely recommended unless
cardiac disease precludes the safe use of HER2-directed
therapies [III, C]. If ChT is contraindicated in patients with
HER2-positive, HR-negative tumours, HER2-targeted ther-
apy without ChT (e.g. trastuzumab or trastuzumabepertu-
zumab58) may be used; if taxanes are contraindicated, a less
toxic ChT partner (e.g. capecitabine or vinorelbine) may be
considered [III, C; off label].
It is suggested that patients with metastatic recurrence
within 6-12 months of receiving adjuvant trastuzumabe
pertuzumab should follow second-line therapy recommen-
dations4 [II, B]. However, patients who experience distant
metastatic recurrence within 12 months of adjuvant tras-
tuzumab (without pertuzumab) may receive ﬁrst-line tras-
tuzumabepertuzumabetaxane or second-line therapy.
In view of the therapies currently used in HER2-positive
EBC, general recommendations for drug rechallenge may
be applied in HER2-positive MBC.

Second-line treatment. Ado-trastuzumab emtansine (T-
DM1) was the gold standard second-line therapy based on
consistent PFS and OS data from the EMILIA4 and
TH3RESA59 trials which compared T-DM1 with either
lapatinibecapecitabine4
or
treatment
of
physician’s
choice,59 respectively [I, A; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 4;
ESCAT score: I-A]. However, data from the DESTINY-Breast-
03 trial indicate that the ADC, fam-trastuzumab der-
uxtecan-nxki (trastuzumab deruxtecan), is associated with
a signiﬁcantly improved PFS (HR 0.28; P ¼ 7.8  1022)
compared with T-DM1 in patients previously treated with a
taxane and trastuzumab in the advanced disease setting.60

Patients with HER2+ MBC

1st-line treatment

HR–
HR+

ChT 
contraindicated

No ChT
contraindications

ChT 
contraindicated

No ChT
contraindications

Docetaxel [or 
paclitaxel (II, A)] 
+ trastuzumab– 
pertuzumab 
≥6 cycles 
[I, A; MCBS 4; 
ESCAT I-A]a,b

Docetaxel [or 
paclitaxel (II, A)] 
+ trastuzumab– 
pertuzumab 
≥6 cycles [I, A; 
MCBS 4; ESCAT 
I-A]a,b followed 
by trastuzumab– 
pertuzumab–ET 
until progression
[I, A]

Trastuzumab– 
pertuzumab until 
progression 
[II, B]

Trastuzumab 
(± pertuzumab) 
+ ET
[II, B]

followed by 
pertuzumab– 
trastuzumab 
until progression 
[I, A]

Figure 3. First- and second-line treatment of HER2-positive MBC.
Purple: general categories or stratiﬁcation; red: surgery; turquoise: combination of treatments or other systemic treatments; green: RT; white: other aspects of
management; blue: systemic anticancer therapy.
BM, brain metastasis; ChT, chemotherapy; CNS, central nervous system; EMA, European Medicines Agency; ESCAT, ESMO Scale for Clinical Actionability of Molecular
Targets; ET, endocrine therapy; FDA, Food and Drug Administration; HER2, human epidermal growth factor receptor 2; HR, hormone receptor; MBC, metastatic breast
cancer; MCBS, ESMO-Magnitude of Clinical Beneﬁt Scale; PD, progressive disease; RT, radiotherapy; SRT, stereotactic radiotherapy; T-DM1, ado-trastuzumab emtansine;
WBRT, whole brain radiotherapy.
a ESMO-MCBS v1.193 was used to calculate scores for new therapies/indications approved by the EMA or FDA. The scores have been calculated by the ESMO-MCBS
Working Group and validated by the ESMO Guidelines Committee (https://www.esmo.org/guidelines/esmo-mcbs/scale-evaluation-forms-v1.0-v1.1/scale-evaluation-
forms-v1.1).
b ESCAT scores apply to genomic alterations only. These scores have been deﬁned by the guideline authors and validated by the ESMO Translational Research and
Precision Medicine Working Group.89

c Not FDA approved for use in second line.
d Keep on current systemic therapy unless PD outside CNS.

second-line therapy in patients who have received two
prior anti-HER2-based regimens if one of these was in the
EBC setting under its current EMA license approval.
Data from the randomised phase II HER2CLIMB trial
support the activity of tucatinib, a HER2-selective tyrosine
kinase inhibitor (TKI) with minimal inhibition of epidermal
growth factor receptor, in combination with capecita-
bineetrastuzumab for patients with BMs.61 Although this
trial was conducted in patients who had previously
received trastuzumab and T-DM1, the PFS and OS beneﬁts
demonstrated in patients with active or stable CNS me-
tastases
(HRs
0.32
and
0.58,
respectively)
warrant
consideration of its second-line use for selected patients
with known BMs [II, A; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 3; ESCAT
score: I-A].

Third-line treatment and beyond. Several drugs have
been approved for use in patients with trastuzumab-,

2nd-line treatment after trastuzumab ± pertuzumab

Active BMs
No, unknown 
or stable BMs

Local intervention 
indicatedd

Local intervention 
not indicated

>10 BMs, 
unfavourable 
prognostic factors

1-10 BMs, 
favourable 
prognostic factors

Trastuzumab 
deruxtecan 
[I, A; ESCAT I-A]b,c

Tucatinib– 
capecitabine– 
trastuzumab
[II, A; MCBS 3; 
ESCAT I-A]a,b

(preferred) 
or
T-DM1 
[I, A; MCBS 4; 
ESCAT I-A]a,b

(preferred)
or
Trastuzumab 
deruxtecan 
[II, A; ESCAT I-A]b,c

SRT
For 1-4 BMs [I, A]
For 5-10 BMs [II, B]

Resection 
[II, B]

SRT 
[II, B]
WBRT
[II, B]

pertuzumab-
and
ADC-pretreated
HER2-positive
MBC
(Figure 4). In the HER2CLIMB study,62 the addition of
tucatinib to trastuzumabecapecitabine increased the me-
dian PFS from 5.6 months to 7.8 months (HR 0.54; P <
0.001) [I, A; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 3; ESCAT score: I-A].
Median OS was also improved with tucatinib-based treat-
ment (21.9 versus 17.4 months, respectively; HR 0.66; P ¼
0.005).
Trastuzumab deruxtecan is a third-line treatment option
for patients who have not received this agent in the second-
line setting based on activity reported in a large, single-
cohort phase II study (N ¼ 184).63 In heavily pretreated
patients with a median of six prior lines of therapy, median
PFS was 19.4 months and ORR was 61.4% (updated data).64

However, treatment was associated with 15.2% of ILD. The
case fatality rate of 2.2% led to a ‘black box warning’ in the
United States. [III, A; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 2; ESCAT
score: I-A].

Patients with HER2+ MBC

3rd-line treatment 
and beyond

Active BMs
No, unknown or 
stable BMs

Local intervention 
indicatedf

Local intervention not 
indicated

>10 BMs, 
unfavourable 
prognostic factors

1-10 BMs, 
favourable 
prognostic factors

Tucatinib–capecitabine–
trastuzumab
[II, A; MCBS 3;
ESCAT I-A]b,c

SRT
For 1-4 BMs [I, A]
For 5-10 BMs [II, B]

Resection 
[II, B]

Trastuzumab deruxtecan
[II, A; MCBS 2;
ESCAT I-A]b,c,g

SRT 
[II, B]
WBRT
[II, B]

Figure 4. Third-line and beyond treatment of HER2-positive MBC.
Purple: general categories or stratiﬁcation; red: surgery; turquoise: combination of treatments or other systemic treatments; green: RT; white: other aspects of
management; blue: systemic anticancer therapy.
BM, brain metastasis; ChT, chemotherapy; CNS, central nervous system; EMA, European Medicines Agency; ESCAT, ESMO Scale for Clinical Actionability of Molecular
Targets; FDA, Food and Drug Administration; HER2, human epidermal growth factor receptor 2; MBC, metastatic breast cancer; MCBS, ESMO-Magnitude of Clinical
Beneﬁt Scale; PD, progressive disease; RT, radiotherapy; SRT, stereotactic radiotherapy; T-DM1, ado-trastuzumab emtansine; WBRT, whole brain radiotherapy.
a There are no data for any of these combinations after tucatinib- and/or trastuzumab deruxtecan-based therapy.
b ESMO-MCBS v1.193 was used to calculate scores for new therapies/indications approved by the EMA or FDA. The scores have been calculated by the ESMO-MCBS
Working Group and validated by the ESMO Guidelines Committee (https://www.esmo.org/guidelines/esmo-mcbs/scale-evaluation-forms-v1.0-v1.1/scale-evaluation-
forms-v1.1).
c ESCAT scores apply to genomic alterations only. These scores have been deﬁned by the guideline authors and validated by the ESMO Translational Research and
Precision Medicine Working Group.89

d FDA approved, not EMA approved.
e If not received as second-line therapy.
f Keep on current systemic therapy unless PD outside CNS.
g If not previously used, including all other drugs that are also a second-line treatment option.

T-DM1 is also a third-line treatment option for those who
have not received this agent as second-line therapy [I, A;
ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 4; ESCAT score: I-A].
Given the introduction of the new available anti-HER2
drugs, the role of lapatinib is unclear but it remains one
of the possible therapy options in HER2-positive MBC. In
TKI-naive patients, lapatinibetrastuzumab improves PFS
(HR 0.73; P ¼ 0.008) with a trend towards improved OS (HR
0.75; P ¼ 0.106) compared with lapatinib alone [I, B; ESMO-
MCBS v1.1 score: 4; ESCAT score: I-A].65

Neratinib, an irreversible pan-HER TKI, is approved by the
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in patients with

Tucatinib–capecitabine–trastuzumab
[I, A; MCBS 3; ESCAT I-A]b,c

or
Trastuzumab deruxtecan
[III, A; MCBS 2; ESCAT I-A]b,c,e

or
T-DM1 [I, A; MCBS 4; ESCAT I-A]b,c,e

Lapatinib–trastuzumab 
[I, B; MCBS 4; ESCAT I-A]a-c

Trastuzumab–ChT
[III, A; ESCAT I-A]a,c

Margetuximab–ChT
[I, B; MCBS 2; ESCAT I-A]a-d

Neratinib–ChT
[I, C; MCBS 1; ESCAT I-A]a-d

improved with margetuximab (5.8 versus 4.9 months; HR
0.76; P ¼ 0.03), but no signiﬁcant OS beneﬁt was demon-
strated [I, B; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 2; ESCAT score: I-A;
FDA approved, not EMA approved]. An exploratory analysis
suggested that the PFS beneﬁt is restricted to patients with
an F-allele for the Fc-gamma receptor IIIA gene.67

Continued HER2 blockade beyond disease progression is
considered standard clinical practice. If the anti-HER2
therapies discussed in the preceding text have been
exhausted, are not considered suitable or are not available,
sequential trastuzumab-based strategies (in combination
with different ChTs) should be considered [III, A].

Recommendations

First-line treatment

 Standard ﬁrst-line treatment of HER2-positive MBC
should be pertuzumabetrastuzumabedocetaxel regard-
less of HR status [I, A; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 4; ESCAT
score: I-A].
 Docetaxel should be given for at least six cycles, if toler-
ated, followed by maintenance pertuzumabetrastuzu-
mab until progression [I, A].
 An alternative taxane (paclitaxel, nab-paclitaxel) may be
substituted for docetaxel [II, A].
 ET may be added to pertuzumabetrastuzumab mainte-
nance
after completion
of ChT
for
HER2-positive,
HR-positive tumours. OFS should also be added for
pre- and perimenopausal women.
 If ChT is contraindicated in patients with HER2-positive,
HR-negative BC, HER2-targeted therapy without ChT
(e.g. trastuzumab or trastuzumabepertuzumab) may
be used; if taxane ChT is contraindicated, a less toxic
ChT partner (e.g. capecitabine or vinorelbine) may be
considered [III, C].
 In selected cases of HER2-positive, HR-positive BC where
the patient is not suitable for ﬁrst-line ChT, ET (e.g. an AI)
in combination with an HER2-targeted therapy, such as
trastuzumab,54,55 trastuzumabepertuzumab,53 trastuzu-
mabelapatinib56 or lapatinib,57 may be recommended
[II, B].
 The use of single-agent ET without HER2-targeted ther-
apy in HER2-positive, HR-positive MBC is not routinely
recommended unless comorbidities (e.g. cardiac disease)
preclude the safe use of HER2-directed therapies [III, C].
 It is suggested that patients with metastatic recurrence
within 12 months of receiving adjuvant trastuzumabe
pertuzumab should follow second-line therapy recom-
mendations [II, B].

Second-line treatment

 Trastuzumab deruxtecan is the preferred second-line
therapy after progression on a taxane and trastuzumab
[I, A].
 T-DM1 is a second-line treatment option after progres-
sion on a taxane and trastuzumab in cases where trastu-
zumab deruxtecan is not available [I, A; ESMO-MCBS v1.1
score: 4; ESCAT score: I-A].

 Tucatinibecapecitabineetrastuzumab
or
trastuzumab
deruxtecan may be used in the second-line setting in
selected patients with BMs [II, A].

Treatment options for third line and beyond

 Tucatinibecapecitabineetrastuzumab [I, A; ESMO-MCBS
v1.1 score: 3; ESCAT score: I-A], trastuzumab deruxtecan
[III, A; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 2; ESCAT score: I-A] and
T-DM1 [I, A; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 4; ESCAT score:
I-A] appear to be the most active treatment options in
the third-line setting. The choice of treatment depends
on prior second-line therapy, patient characteristics,
toxicity proﬁle and availability.
 In later lines of therapy, lapatinib is an evidence-based
therapy option to be used preferably in combinations
(e.g. with capecitabine, trastuzumab or ET) [I, C].
 Neratinib [I, C; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 1; ESCAT score:
I-A; FDA approved, not EMA approved] and margetuxi-
mab [I, B; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 2; ESCAT score: I-A;
FDA approved, not EMA approved] can be considered
reasonable approaches in the late-line scenario. Although
there are no comparative data, the most appropriate
setting might be in patients who have exhausted all stan-
dard therapy options [V, C]. However, in HER2-positive
MBC, there is no evidence for sequencing a TKI after a TKI.
 Continued anti-HER2-based therapy is the current clinical
standard for patients with HER2-positive tumours. If
other anti-HER2 therapies have been exhausted, are
not considered suitable or are not available, trastuzumab
beyond progression should be considered [III, A].

TNBC

First-line systemic treatment strategies. A proposed treat-
ment strategy for the management of mTNBC is shown in
Figure 5. For most TNBCs, ChT remains the standard treat-
ment. However, speciﬁc data concerning mTNBCs treated
by historical but still relevant ChTs are missing. In the ﬁrst
line, establishment of PD-L1 and gBRCAm status is para-
mount since they enable management optimisation.

PD-L1-positive mTNBC. Three trials have addressed the
question of adding an ICI to ChT in mTNBC,69-71 two with
atezolizumab70,71
and
one
with
pembrolizumab69

Patients with mTNBC

Search theragnostic markers

PD-L1+
gBRCAm
PD-L1–, 
gBRCAm-wild-type

Atezolizumab–nab-paclitaxel 
[II, A; MCBS 3; ESCAT I-A]a,b,e,f 

PARP inhibitor-based
therapy (preferred
over ChT) [I, A; MCBS
4; ESCAT I-A]e,f

ChT-based therapy
(platinumg preferred
over taxane) [I, A]

or 
Pembrolizumab–ChT 
[I, A; MCBS 3; ESCAT I-A]a,c-f

Sacituzumab govitecan (preferred) [I, A; MCBS 4]c,e or ChT

ChT: eribulin, capecitabine or vinorelbine

Figure 5. Treatment of mTNBC.
Purple: general categories or stratiﬁcation; turquoise: combination of treatments or other systemic treatments; white: other aspects of management; blue: systemic
anticancer therapy.
ChT, chemotherapy; EMA, European Medicines Agency; ESCAT, ESMO Scale for Clinical Actionability of Molecular Targets; FDA, Food and Drug Administration; gBRCAm,
germline BRCA1/2 mutation; ICI, immune checkpoint inhibitor; MCBS, ESMO-Magnitude of Clinical Beneﬁt Scale; mTNBC, metastatic triple-negative breast cancer; PARP,
poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase; PD-L1, programmed death-ligand 1.
a May be considered as monotherapy in further lines in case of high PD-L1 positivity and no previous exposure to ICI.
b EMA approved, not FDA approved.
c FDA approved, not EMA approved.
d ChT physician’s choice of nab-paclitaxel, paclitaxel or gemcitabine/carboplatin.
e ESMO-MCBS v1.193 was used to calculate scores for new therapies/indications approved by the EMA or FDA. The scores have been calculated by the ESMO-MCBS
Working Group and validated by the ESMO Guidelines Committee (https://www.esmo.org/guidelines/esmo-mcbs/scale-evaluation-forms-v1.0-v1.1/scale-evaluation-
forms-v1.1).
f ESCAT scores apply to genomic alterations only. These scores have been deﬁned by the guideline authors and validated by the ESMO Translational Research and
Precision Medicine Working Group.89

g If not used previously.

nab-paclitaxel70 whereas IMpassion131 evaluated atezolizu-
mab plus paclitaxel.71 IMpassion130 had co-primary end-
points of PFS and OS in the intention-to-treat (ITT)
population and had a hierarchal design that allowed for
formal evaluation of OS in the PD-L1-positive population only
if the OS in the ITT population was signiﬁcantly improved by
the addition of atezolizumab. In the ITT population, atezoli-
zumab provided a PFS beneﬁt of 7.2 versus 5.5 months with
a HR of 0.8 (95% CI 0.69-0.92; P ¼ 0.002). In the PD-L1-
positive group, atezolizumab provided a PFS beneﬁt of 7.5
versus 5 months with an HR of 0.62 (95% CI 0.49-0.78; P <
0.001). In the ITT population, there was no signiﬁcant beneﬁt
in OS with the addition of atezolizumab; median OS was 21.3
versus 17.6 months (HR 0.84; 95% CI 0.69-1.02; P ¼ 0.08).
However, despite the hierarchical statistical design, an anal-
ysis in the PD-L1-positive population was conducted, which
showed an OS of 25 versus 15.1 months favouring the

Imminent organ failure
No imminent organ failure

Preferred: taxane or 
anthracycline monotherapy, 
with opposite agent used 
at progression

Preferred: anthracycline–taxane-
based combination
Alternative: taxane–bevacizumab 
or capecitabine–bevacizumab 

atezolizumab arm (an updated efﬁcacy analysis reported a
smaller OS difference of 25 versus 18 months70). Based on
these data, atezolizumabenab-paclitaxel was approved by
the EMA (but has been withdrawn from the FDA approval
process by the manufacturer due to lack of conﬁrmatory
data) and may be considered an option in the ﬁrst-line
setting in patients with de novo MBC or a DFI 12 months
whose tumours have PD-L1 expression 1% based on
staining of the immune cells [II, A; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 3;
ESCAT score: I-A; EMA approved, not FDA approved].
Unlike the IMpassion130 results, in the PD-L1-positive
population of IMpassion131, atezolizumab did not signiﬁ-
cantly improve PFS or OS compared with placebo. It is
unclear if steroid use with solvent-based paclitaxel played
any role in dampening the effect of the immune response
(although beneﬁt was seen in KEYNOTE-355 where steroids
were used in two of the three ChT arms69) or if other

gBRCAm mTNBC. Carboplatin may be considered as a su-
perior treatment option to docetaxel, since median PFS was
improved but only by 2.6 months without an OS beneﬁt.73

PARP inhibitors are recommended [I, A; ESMO-MCBS v1.1
score: 4; ESCAT score: I-A] (see section on Hereditary BC).

PD-L1-negative and gBRCA-wild-type mTNBC. The initial
treatment is ChT. Several options are possible according to
previous treatment exposure in the EBC setting, DFI and
disease presentation. If the patient has no prior exposure to
anthracyclines and no medical contraindications, the op-
tions are anthracyclines or taxanes as monotherapy,74 or
various
combinations
incorporating
these
two
drugs
together or not. Nab-paclitaxelecarboplatin is also a
valid option since it demonstrated superiority in PFS
compared with nab-paclitaxelegemcitabine or carboplatine
gemcitabine.75

Regarding the question of single-agent versus combina-
tion ChT, although a Cochrane review found that combi-
nation ChT was associated with a longer OS when compared

with single-agent therapy (HR 0.88; 95% CI 0.83-0.94;
P < 0.001), the clinical beneﬁt was modest and at the cost
of increased toxicity.76 Few of these trials systematically
investigated the combination versus sequential approach,
assessed differences in QoL or focused on mTNBC. For these
reasons, and the fact that a higher ORR was achieved with
combination regimens (odds ratio 1.28; 95% CI 1.15-1.42;
P < 0.001), this approach is not considered a standard but
could be preferred in cases of imminent organ failure.
There is a paucity of trials addressing the question of
bevacizumab plus ChT combinations in mTNBC. However, a
pooled analysis of several phase III trials showed that in
patients with mTNBC, the addition of bevacizumab to
paclitaxel or capecitabine improved PFS (HR 0.63; 95% CI
0.52-0.76) with a 2.7-month absolute improvement in PFS
but no improvement in OS.51 Therefore, bevacizumab plus
either paclitaxel or capecitabine are also therapeutic op-
tions in the ﬁrst-line setting in countries where bev-
acizumab is available [ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 2].

Based on these results, sacituzumab has received FDA
approval but is not currently EMA approved. It might be
considered
as
the
preferred
treatment
option
after
anthracyclines and taxanes, particularly if patients have also
received carboplatin and capecitabine in the adjuvant
setting and if no theragnostic markers are available such as
gBRCAm [ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 4; FDA approved, not
EMA approved]. After progression on sacituzumab, all ChT
recommendations for HER2-negative disease also apply for
TNBC such as eribulin, capecitabine and vinorelbine.
ICI monotherapy in later lines for advanced TNBC is not
recommended due to low response rates, as seen in the
KEYNOTE-119
trial. However, although
pembrolizumab
monotherapy does not improve OS versus ChT, there does

not appear to be any deleterious effect on this endpoint
using ICI monotherapy versus ChT in the ITT population. In
addition, the beneﬁt of pembrolizumab compared with
single-agent ChT increased depending on CPS, with a sig-
niﬁcant OS beneﬁt versus ChT seen in cases of CPS 20.79

Therefore, it seems reasonable to discuss the option of
pembrolizumab
treatment
for
patients
with
tumours
strongly positive for PD-L1 if they have not been exposed to
ICI therapy in a previous line or do not have access to a
clinical trial.

Recommendations

First-line treatment

 If PD-L1 positive, the preferred option is ChT in combina-
tion with an ICI.

B In case of PD-L1 immune cell positivity (Ventana
SP142), atezolizumab plus nab-paclitaxel where the
DFI is 12 months in countries where this indication
is approved [II, A; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 3; ESCAT
score: I-A; EMA approved, not FDA approved].

B In case of CPS 10, pembrolizumab plus paclitaxel,
nab-paclitaxel or carboplatinegemcitabine where the
DFI is 6 months [I, A; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 3;
ESCAT score: I-A; FDA approved, not EMA approved].
 If gBRCAm and PD-L1 negative, the preferred options are
olaparib or talazoparib [I, A; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 4;
ESCAT score: I-A] or ChT with carboplatin [II, A] (see
following text).
 If PD-L1 negative and gBRCA-wild-type, the preferred op-
tion depends on previous treatment exposure, disease
presentation, DFI and patient considerations.

B Taxane monotherapy is the most frequent option.

B Anthracyclines are an option in cases of no prior expo-
sure or if rechallenge is possible.

B In case of imminent organ failure, combination ther-
apy is preferred based on a taxane and/or anthracy-
cline combination and including bevacizumab (ﬁrst
line only) if available.

Progression after anthracyclines and taxanes

 Sacituzumab (if available) is the preferred treatment op-
tion after taxanes [I, A; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 4; FDA
approved, not EMA approved].

 After progression, all ChT recommendations for HER2-
negative disease also apply for TNBC such as eribulin,
capecitabine and vinorelbine.
 There are no data to support antiandrogen therapy, or
inhibitors targeting PI3K, HER2 or AKT for advanced
TNBC and therefore these cannot be recommended for
routine use outside a clinical trial.

Hereditary BC (gBRCAm)

Two randomised studies of patients with HER2-negative
MBC and gBRCAm previously treated with anthracyclines
and/or taxanes demonstrated that treatment with a PARP
inhibitor (olaparib, talazoparib) resulted in statistically sig-
niﬁcant improvements in PFS compared with capecitabine,
vinorelbine, eribulin or (in one study) gemcitabine.47,48 OS
was not improved but a post hoc subset analysis of one
study suggested improved OS in patients receiving olaparib
who had not received prior ChT for metastatic disease.81

Notably, over 40% of the control arm in each study
received a platinum or PARP inhibitor after progression on
study treatment.
The patients enrolled in the pivotal trials were largely
women. However, there is no plausible biological reason to
expect lower efﬁcacy in men with MBC and gBRCAm.
Eligibility criteria for the studies included prior treatment
with (or inappropriateness for) anthracyclineetaxane ChT.
This selection was guided by regulatory considerations
rather than a biological rationale. Therefore, PARP inhibitors
should not be withheld from patients without prior
anthracyclineetaxane treatment. Indeed, based on the
subset analysis of OlympiAD, requiring progression on these
agents in the metastatic setting may be associated with a
lower magnitude of OS beneﬁt. Patients with HR-positive
MBC and gBRCAm do beneﬁt from PARP inhibitor treat-
ment, with no statistical evidence of heterogeneity of effect
in either of the pivotal phase III trials.
Platinum-based ChT (single agent or combined with
paclitaxel) is associated with a substantial PFS beneﬁt in
patients with MBC and gBRCAm.73,82 Median PFS with
paclitaxel and carboplatin in the BROCADE-3 study was
12.6 months but there was no single-agent ChT arm for
comparison.82 In TNBC, PFS with ﬁrst-line single-agent
carboplatin was superior to single-agent docetaxel only in
patients with gBRCAm.73 There are no studies directly
comparing PARP inhibitors with a platinum agent (either
alone or in combination with other ChT agents or ICIs). It
should be noted that in the pivotal trials, health-related
quality of life (HRQoL) was better with PARP inhibitors
compared with ChT.83,84 There are no studies comparing
PARP inhibitors with ET (alone or with targeted therapies)
in patients with HR-positive disease. Decisions about
sequencing of PARP inhibitors with other treatments
should be based on factors such as prior treatment
response, disease burden, PD-L1 status, PIK3CA status, HR
status
and
the
relative
toxicities
of
the
different
approaches.

Recommendations

 Patients
with
HER2-negative
MBC
and
germline
pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants in BRCA1 or
BRCA2 should be offered treatment with a PARP
inhibitor (olaparib or talazoparib), independent of HR
status, as an alternative to ChT [I, A; ESMO-MCBS v1.1
score: 4; ESCAT score: I-A].
 Prior treatment with anthracyclinesetaxanes should not
be required before offering patients with MBC and
gBRCAm treatment with a PARP inhibitor; nor should
HR-positive patients be required to demonstrate com-
plete endocrine resistance [I, D].
 There is insufﬁcient evidence to determine the optimal
sequencing of PARP inhibitors with other active treat-
ments such as ChTeICI combinations in mTNBC or ET
and targeted therapy combinations in HR-positive dis-
ease [I, A].
 Patients who may be considered for treatment with a
PARP inhibitor should be offered genetic testing for
pathogenic variants in BRCA1 and BRCA2 regardless of
age, family history or BC subtype [I, A].

Site-speciﬁc management

Recommendations

Primary stage IV disease

 For patients with newly diagnosed stage IV BC and an
intact primary tumour, therapeutic decisions should ideally
be discussed in a multidisciplinary context [II, B].
 LRT of the primary tumour in the absence of symptom-
atic local disease does not lead to an OS beneﬁt and is
thus not routinely recommended [II, D].
 In patients with local symptoms caused by the primary
tumour or metastatic disease, the use of local treatment
modalities should be evaluated [II, A].
 Surgery of the primary tumour may be considered for
patients with bone-only metastasis, HR-positive tu-
mours, HER2-negative tumours, patients <55 years, pa-
tients with OMD and those with a good response to
initial systemic therapy [II, B].

OMD

 The dynamics in chronic metastatic conditions should be
reviewed
to
identify
induced/recurrent
OMD.85

Complete imaging history should be available for deci-
sions on OMD care [V, B].
 Patients with OMD should be discussed in a multidisci-
plinary context to individualise management [V, B].
 Multimodality treatment approaches involving LRT [e.g.
high conformal radiotherapy (RT), image-guided abla-
tion, selective internal radiotherapy and/or surgery]
combined with systemic treatments are recommended,
tailored to the disease presentation in the individual pa-
tient [V, B].
 Local ablative therapy to all metastatic lesions may be
offered on an individual basis after discussion in a multi-
disciplinary setting [II, C]; however, it is unknown if this
leads to improved OS.

Bone metastases and bone-modifying agents

 A multidisciplinary approach is essential to manage pa-
tients with bone metastases and prevent skeletal-
related events (SREs) [V, A].
 An orthopaedic evaluation is advised in case of signiﬁ-
cant lesions in long bones or vertebrae as well as in pa-
tients with metastatic spinal cord compression (MSCC) to
discuss the possible role of surgery [IV, A].
 RT is recommended for lesions at moderate risk of frac-
ture and those associated with moderate to severe pain
[I, A].
 A single 8-Gy RT fraction is as effective as fractionated
schemes in uncomplicated bone metastases [I, A].
 RT should be delivered after surgery for stabilisation or
separation surgery for MSCC [III, B].
 Bone-modifying agents (BMAs), e.g. bisphosphonates or
denosumab, are recommended for patients with bone
metastases, regardless of symptoms [I, A].
 Zoledronate can be administered every 12 weeks in pa-
tients with stable disease after 3-6 monthly treatments
[I, B].
 Denosumab should be administered every 4 weeks and
is more effective than zoledronate in delaying ﬁrst and
subsequent SREs [I, B].
 Before BMA initiation, patients should have a complete
dental evaluation and ideally complete any required
dental treatment. Calcium and vitamin D supplements
should be prescribed [III, A].
 The optimal duration of BMA therapy has not been
deﬁned but it is reasonable to interrupt therapy after
2 years for patients in remission [II, B].86

 The
ideal
sequence
of
therapies
has
not
been
deﬁned but it seems reasonable to document tumour
response with a systemic treatment before suggesting
LRT [V, C].

BMs and LMs

 BMs should be managed according to the recommenda-
tions outlined in the European Association of Neuro-
Oncology-ESMO (EANO-ESMO) Clinical Practice Guide-
line (CPG) for the management of patients with BMs
from solid tumours.87

Patients with a suspicion of OMD

Biopsy conﬁ
 rmation (when appropriate)
Systemic imaging staging, preferably with PET scan

Patients with a diagnosis of OMDa

MDT discussion
Informed discussion with patient, aligning expectations

Consider site of metastases (CNS, bone, visceral, etc.) as 
they may require different approaches
Consider management of the primary tumour and axilla in 
patients with synchronous OMD
Consider systemic treatment to document response as a 
ﬁ
 rst approach
Consider local approach (surgery, RT, RFA, etc.)

Continue systemic treatment when appropriateb

Figure 6. Treatment of OMD.
Purple: general categories or stratiﬁcation; white: other aspects of management.
CNS, central nervous system; MDT, multidisciplinary team; OMD, oligometastatic
disease; PET, positron emission tomography; RFA, radiofrequency ablation; RT,
radiotherapy.
a Consider elements in current deﬁnitions, i.e. limited or low-volume metastatic
disease; up to ﬁve lesions in total, not necessarily in the same organ; all
potentially amenable to receive local treatment.
b The duration of systemic treatment remains a topic of debate.

 LMs should be treated according to the recommenda-
tions outlined in the EANO-ESMO CPG for the manage-
ment of patients with LMs from solid tumours.88

New drugs

PERSONALISED MEDICINE

In MBC, standard therapies are personalised based on
biomarkers, as described in the respective sections. In
addition, there are now several tissue and site-agnostic
approvals. For example, both larotrectinib [ESMO-MCBS
v1.1 score: 3; ESCAT score: I-C] and entrectinib [ESMO-

LONG-TERM IMPLICATIONS AND SURVIVORSHIP

In MBC, regular assessments of disease status and therapy
toxicities should include clinical assessments, blood tests,
imaging and patient-reported outcomes (PROs). Principles
of disease monitoring by imaging are discussed in the
Staging and Risk Assessment section.

Side-effects

General principles. Decisions regarding the systemic treat-
ment of MBC should be based on a balanced consideration
of the predicted response to a particular treatment strategy
and associated tolerability and AEs. Management of side-
effects should be according to the respective ESMO
CPGs.90 Particular attention must be paid to the incidence
and risk of side-effects in speciﬁc populations, such as
elderly patients and those with comorbidities, in order to
ensure therapy adherence. Proactive symptom manage-
ment and education helps to alleviate side-effects and im-
proves QoL [I, A].
PRO measures capture the patient experience and
perceived impact of treatment and toxicity on health status.
PROs include areas of HRQoL as well as patient satisfaction
with care.91

Further details regarding the management of common
and
therapy-speciﬁc
toxicities
can
be
found
in
the

Recommendations

 An
interdisciplinary
approach
is
critical,
including
specialised oncology and/or breast care nurses to
proactively screen for and manage treatment-emergent
toxicities.
 Patients should be informed about treatment choices
and
side-effect
proﬁles
of
recommended
systemic
treatments.
 All treatment should include formal patient education
regarding side-effect management [I, A].

 Careful assessment of side-effects should occur at each
visit. Electronic PROs may be useful in this context.
 QoL assessments should be incorporated into the evalu-
ation of treatment efﬁcacy.
 Dose reduction and delay are effective strategies to
manage toxicity in advanced disease [I, A].

Palliative care

Palliative care is an area of high importance in oncology and
ESMO has published several CPGs in this ﬁeld which also
apply to the management of patients with MBC.90 Palliative
care should be integrated early and offered both in an
inpatient and an outpatient setting.

General principles of care. For patients with MBC, median
OS is increasing with the introduction of new treatments
and patients are more likely to experience metastases in
many areas of the body.92 As well as receiving the best
available treatment, patients should be offered optimal
symptom control, psychological, social and spiritual sup-
port. Many areas of care need to be managed, including
pain, dyspnoea, cachexia, fatigue, depression and anxiety,
which should also consider comorbidities, previous treat-
ments, age and patient preferences. Shared decision making
between the patient and health care professionals, as well
as good communication and relationship building with the
patient, family members and caregivers, is therefore para-
mount to ensure a mutual understanding of treatment ex-
pectations and goals.
The emotional toll of caring for patients who are dying
also has an impact on health care staff, and processes
should be in place to support their mental health, enabling
them to continue to provide sensitive and effective care.

Patient perspective

METHODOLOGY

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

FUNDING

No external funding has been received for the preparation
of these guidelines. Production costs have been covered by
ESMO from central funds.

DISCLOSURE

FA reports receipt of research funding and has served as
speaker/advisor (compensated to the hospital) for Roche,
AstraZeneca, Daiichi Sankyo, Pﬁzer, Novartis and Eli Lilly.
CHB reports grants/research support (to the institution)
from Pﬁzer, Novartis, Amgen, AstraZeneca, Boehringer
Ingelheim, GlaxoSmithKline (GSK), Roche/Genentech, Eli
Lilly, Sanoﬁ, Taiho Pharmaceutical, Mylan, Merrimack,
Merck, AbbVie, Astellas Pharma, BioMarin, Bristol-Myers
Squibb (BMS), Daiichi Sankyo, Abraxis Biosciences, AB Sci-
ence, Asana Biosciences, Medivation, Exelixis, ImClone
Systems, LEO Pharma, Millennium, Merck KGaA, Shanghai
Henlius Biotech, Polyphor and PharmaMar; ownership or
stocks in Biomarker, Tummi and MEDSir; and advisory
boards and consulting for Boehringer Ingelheim, GSK,
Novartis, Pﬁzer, Roche/Genentech, Eisai, Bayer, Merck Sharp
& Dohme (MSD), AstraZeneca, Zodiac, Eli Lilly and Sanoﬁ. JC
has served as a consultant/advisor for Roche, Celgene,
Cellestia, AstraZeneca, Seattle Genetics, Daiichi Sankyo,
Erytech, Athenex, Polyphor, Eli Lilly, MSD, GSK, Leuko, Bio-
asis,
Clovis
Oncology,
Boehringer
Ingelheim,
Ellipses,
Hibercell, BioInvent, Gemoab and Gilead; received hono-
raria from Roche, Novartis, Celgene, Eisai, Pﬁzer, Samsung
Bioepis, Eli Lilly, MSD and Daiichi Sankyo; received research
funding to the institution from Roche, Ariad Pharmaceuti-
cals, AstraZeneca, Baxalta GmbH/Servier Affaires, Bayer
Healthcare, Eisai, Roche, Guardanth Health, MSD, Pﬁzer,

